The ADA and ABA Standards address access for
various types of disabilities and mobility
aids.
Some provisions are best understood in relation
to the use of wheelchairs and powered devices.
This animation illustrates wheelchair maneuvering
and requirements in the Standards for clearances,
floor surfaces, and reach ranges.
Space at least 30 inches wide and 48 inches
long is required to accommodate an occupied
wheelchair.
To allow room for movement and sway, accessible
routes must provide a continuous clear width
of at least 36 inches.
The width can reduce to 32 inches minimum
at points, such as doorways.
Segments with a reduced width are limited
to a depth of 24 inches, and there must be
a separation of at least 48 inches between
them.
Where routes make a turn around an obstruction,
additional space is required depending on
the tightness of the turn.
If an obstruction is at least 48 inches wide,
additional clear width is not required.
If an obstruction is less than 48 inches wide,
the route clear width can remain 36 inches
minimum if at least 60 inches is provided
at the turn to facilitate maneuvering.
Otherwise, the clear width must be at least
42 inches approaching the turn, 48 inches
minimum at the turn, and 42 inches beyond
the turn.
Space at least 60 inches wide provides room
for wheelchairs to pass.
Where routes are less than 60 inches wide,
passing space 60 inches by 60 inches minimum
is required at 200 foot intervals.
Passing space can also be achieved at route
intersections with segments at least 48 inches
deep.
Maneuvering clearances required at doors,
which are sized according to the approach
and swing, usually require additional space
beyond the minimum clear width of routes.
Room for turning is required in certain spaces,
such as toilet rooms and dressing rooms.
Turning space can be provided in the form
of a 60 inches minimum diameter circle or
a T-shaped space.
Maneuvering for turns varies by mobility aid
and personal preferences and abilities.
With manual chairs, moving wheels in opposite
directions is the most efficient way to turn.
Turns can also be made by keeping one wheel
stationary.
Among powered devices, the turning radius
can vary greatly.
Objects that provide space for knees and toes
can overlap turning space.
Minimizing such overlap or avoiding it altogether
is advisable to provide easier access, especially
for larger devices, such as scooters and power
chairs.
Turning space can also be provided in the
shape of a "T" that is at least 60 inches
by 60 inches overall with segments at least
36 inches wide.
This space can be oriented for approach on
any segment of the T. Objects with knee and
toe space can overlap only one segment of
the T so that the other two remain clear for
approach and backing up.
Turning within the minimum dimensions specified
can be difficult using scooters and similar
devices that have a larger turning radius.
The availability of additional space beyond
the minimum required will ease maneuvering.
Also, avoiding overlap of the space by an
object will better accommodate devices with
front tillers.
The Standards also address ground and floor
surfaces.
Surfaces must be firm, stable, and slip resistant,
and changes in level must be properly treated.
Abrupt level changes can be difficult to negotiate
and catch front casters unless properly edged
or sloped.
Changes in level up to one quarter inch are
permitted without treatment.
Level changes up to half an inch must be beveled
with a slope no steeper than one to two.
Changes in level higher than half an inch
must be ramped.
The Standards also limit openings, such as
grates, in ground and floor surfaces.
Surface openings that are too wide can catch
wheelchair front casters, as well as the tips
of crutches and walkers.
Openings in accessible surfaces cannot exceed
half an inch in one dimension.
Openings must be oriented so that the long
dimension is perpendicular to the direction
of travel.
Carpet that is thick, soft, or loose can make
wheelchair maneuvering difficult.
The Standards address pile height and texture
and require that carpet be firmly secured.
Otherwise, rolling or buckling can occur,
greatly impairing wheelchair travel.
Proper securement is needed to prevent carpet
from rolling or shifting.
Wheelchair space is required at accessible
building elements.
In general, this space can be oriented for
a forward or side approach, but a forward
approach is required at certain elements,
such as drinking fountains.
This space must be at least 30 inches wide
and 48 inches long.
If space for a forward approach is recessed
in an alcove or otherwise confined on both
sides more than 24 inches, the width is increased
to 36 inches.
Clear floor space can be oriented for a side
approach at most elements.
For side approaches, space that is recessed
or confined on both sides more than 15 inches
must be at least 60 inches deep to facilitate
maneuvering into the space.
Space for knees and toes allows people using
wheelchairs to pull up sufficiently to elements
such as drinking fountains, lavatories and
sinks, and dining and work surfaces.
Space for toes is 9 inches high and 6 inches
deep.
The clearance must increase to 27 inches over
a span of 3 inches or a rate of six-to-one.
The remainder of the space to the leading
edge must provide a clearance of at least
27 inches for knees.
These clearances allow room for plumbing,
enclosures, and supports, which cannot protrude
into the knee and toe space.
Where knee and toe space is required, it must
be at least 17 inches deep.
The maximum total depth is 25 inches.
Space beyond this depth is not usable.
Accessible reach ranges extend from 48 inches
to 15 inches above the floor or ground.
This applies to the operable parts of an element.
Forward reaches do not extend far beyond the
toes.
For this reason, the reach depth over an object
cannot exceed the available knee and toe space
below.
If the reach depth is greater than 20 inches,
the maximum height is reduced from 48 inches
to 44 inches.
The reach depth, like the knee and toe space,
is limited to 25 inches.
The side reach range is also 48 inches to
15 inches if unobstructed.
Obstructions are limited to a height of 34
inches.
The 48 inches maximum height is permitted
to a depth of 10 inches.
The maximum height reduces to 46 inches beyond
a 10 inches depth up to the maximum depth
of 24 inches.
The reach to objects located in corners can
be difficult in view of the side reach radius.
It is advisable, though not specifically required
in the Standards, to avoid locating objects
in corners accessed only from a side approach.
Further guidance on the ADA and ABA Standards
is available from the U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.